For more than seven decades, NATO has
operated on a single premise: America
will show up. Not just politically, but
in force, through its troops stationed
across Europe, its intelligence networks
overhead, and its nuclear umbrella in
the back. That promise turned the
alliance into something more than a
pact. It became a central pillar of the
liberal order, tying together dozens of
militaries into a single integrated
war-fighting machine. In doing so, NATO
went on to become the most powerful and
most successful military alliance in
history.
But that assumption is no longer as firm
as it once was. In Washington, the
strategic focus is shifting. It's moving
toward Asia, where the rivalry with
China is seen as more consequential,
more demanding, and ultimately more
pressing in the decades ahead. In that
context, NATO is increasingly seen not
as a cornerstone of American security,
but as an outdated commitment that ties
down resources and locks US power
projection to a region that no longer
holds strategic weight. Trump [music]
has been skeptical of NATO since taking
office. So, what happens if he follows
through and [music] America stops
showing up?
>> [music]
>> Today's video is sponsored by Freecash.
One thing I've noticed lately is how
much idle time gets absorbed by the
phone. Waiting for a flight, sitting in
an Uber, or just switching off for a few
minutes between work. But rather than
just filling time with another scroll, I
started using freecash.com.
The concept is simple. You choose from a
range of small activities [music] like
playing mobile games, answering surveys,
or testing apps. And once you complete
them, you earn rewards in return. Those
rewards can then be withdrawn through
PayPal, gift cards, crypto, or other
payout options upon a minimum of $25
earnings.
It's simply a way to make your downtime
slightly more useful. [music] I tried a
few of the game offers myself. You pick
one, play for a bit, complete
milestones, and the rewards build over
time. freecash.com also has thousands of
available offers, so there's always
something different depending on where
you are and what's available in your
region.
And for people wondering whether it's
legitimate, Freecash has already paid
out hundreds of millions of dollars to
users worldwide, and it has strong
ratings on Trustpilot. If you want to
try it, you can use my link below or the
QR code on screen. Signing up through it
gives you a $10 bonus after completing
your first offer.
>> [music]
>> Suppose the United States, for whatever
reason, steps away from NATO, the
alliance wouldn't disappear overnight.
Most, if not all, commitments remain in
place. The institutions continue to
function, and the member [music] states
are still there. On paper, NATO would
survive, but in practice, something far
more important breaks down. You see,
NATO has been built around American
capabilities that are not easily
replaced. Take logistics as an example.
Modern warfare depends on speed, the
ability to move troops, equipment, and
supplies across long distances in a
matter of days.
The United States [music] carries most
of that burden through its strategic
airlift fleet with roughly 270 heavy
aircraft, including C-17s and C-5s. By
comparison, European allies collectively
operate just over a dozen aircraft in
that same class, with most of their
capacity tied up in smaller A400M and
C-130 fleets. Europe can still deploy
forces without the US, but not at the
same scale [music] or speed.
Then, there is intelligence. American
satellites, surveillance aircraft, and
reconnaissance systems provide a
constant stream of data, tracking
movements, identifying targets, and
building a real-time picture of the
battlefield. The Pentagon operates
hundreds of military and intelligence
satellites, supported by a large fleet
of surveillance aircraft, from [music]
AWACS to signals intelligence platforms
and long-endurance drones.
By comparison, Europeans rely on a
handful of national satellite systems
and a much smaller pool of surveillance
aircraft, many of which are shared
through NATO. To be clear, the
capability is there, but it is limited
and fragmented. If the American layer is
removed, coordination across Europe
becomes slower, less certain, and more
dependent on national systems that were
never designed to operate independently
[music] at that scale.
Missile defense and long-range strike
capabilities follow the same pattern.
The US military can intercept incoming
threats and strike [music] deep into
contested areas. Systems like Aegis and
the B-2 make that possible. Those
capabilities don't just [music] add
firepower. They shape the battlefield
before it is even engaged. Without them,
European militaries would have to
operate closer to the threat, with fewer
options and higher risks.
And then, there is the command structure
itself. NATO's integration has always
revolved around American leadership,
planning, and coordination. It's not
just about who gives the orders, but
also about how those orders are executed
through standardized procedures and
shared platforms. Without the Pentagon
at its center, Europe's command
structure would no longer function in
the same way.
But NATO didn't just integrate armies.
It made them dependent on each other and
above [music] all dependent on the
United States. That dependence is best
visible in the hardware. Many European
militaries are built around American
platforms from [music] fighter jets to
missile systems. The F-35, for instance,
is not just an aircraft. It is part of a
larger ecosystem that connects sensors,
[music] communications, and targeting
across multiple countries.
That level of integration brings
enormous advantages, but it also creates
reliance. If the United States steps
back, maintaining that ecosystem becomes
more complicated for all sorts of
technical and political reasons.
However, none of that means Europe is
defenseless, far from it. European NATO
members collectively field capable
militaries with advanced technology and
[music] significant resources. The
problem is that those capabilities are
not structured to operate entirely on
their own.
So, while NATO as an organization
wouldn't necessarily collapse with
America's exit, it would no doubt face
an unprecedented crisis. Article 5,
NATO's core commitment, would [music]
become the focal point of the alliance's
uncertainty. It wouldn't disappear, but
its credibility would come under
question. Responses would become less
predictable, more conditional, and
[music] increasingly shaped by the
political will of individual European
states. And that uncertainty would have
compounding ramifications.
Deterrence depends as much on perception
as it does on capability. If adversaries
begin to question Article 5 and whether
NATO will respond as a unified force,
the threshold for testing that
assumption lowers. Not through
full-scale war, but through smaller
calculated moves probing for cracks in
the armor. Think of gray-zone tactics,
cyber operations, political
interference, limited military actions,
and so on.
In every measurable way, Europe would
have to reinvent its military posture in
the air, on land, at sea, [music] and in
space. Strategic airlift would need to
be expanded and intelligence networks
would have to be strengthened,
>> [music]
>> including satellites and surveillance
systems. Missile defense would need to
be scaled up along with long-range
strike capabilities that can operate
without American support. A study by the
International Institute for Strategic
Studies puts a price tag on that gap.
Europe would need to spend roughly $1
trillion
over the next 25 years just to replace
the conventional capabilities currently
provided by the United States. That
includes around 400 additional fighter
jets, 600 main battle tanks, 20
destroyers, and 10 nuclear-powered
attack submarines along with dozens of
missile systems, helicopters, and AWACS
aircraft. Beyond hardware, Europe would
also need to build out a new command
structure to tie everything together.
>> [music]
>> However, Europe's industrial base is not
built for that kind of rapid expansion.
Production lines are limited, naval
shipyards have shrunk, and political
will is lacking. Land systems could be
scaled up within a decade, but the air
and naval sectors, where American
capabilities dominate, are far harder to
replace. [music]
France and Turkey stand out as partial
exceptions.
The French are working to increase
annual Rafale fighter jet production to
around 30 by the end of the decade.
Meanwhile, Turkey is currently building
around 50 naval vessels simultaneously,
including frigates, corvettes,
submarines, [music]
and amphibious ships. But besides those
two, few countries in Europe have the
industrial base to scale production
quickly.
And even then, that trillion-dollar
estimate covers only conventional forces
and represents the bare minimum needed
to defend Europe itself. It wouldn't
give Europe the kind of global reach the
United States has, nor the ability to
conduct sustained offensive operations
beyond its own region.
Technically, Europe has the economic
capacity to make that investment. Its
combined GDP rivals that of the United
States, and it has resources needed, if
governments decide to follow through.
The real problem, however, is time.
Replacing the removed American
capabilities would take decades, [music]
and during that time, Europe would be
exposed and vulnerable to coercion. In
geopolitics, those who can't defend
themselves get picked apart.
>> [music]
>> For all the focus on what the United
States brings to the alliance, Europe
brings something just as important,
geography. Access to that geography is
what allows American power to extend
beyond its own borders.
Across the continent, the Pentagon
maintains a network of more than 40
military bases, along with logistics and
pre-positioned equipment. Those are not
just forward deployments aimed at
Russia. They are staging grounds for
operations into the Middle East, North
Africa, the Sahel, the Arctic, and
Russia's western border. Remove Europe
from the equation and America's reach
becomes more limited, more distant, and
more expensive to maintain. No amount of
aircraft carriers can replace an entire
continent. Without its bases in Europe,
America would be projecting power across
two oceans, thousands of kilometers from
any major conflict zone.
Then, there is the political layer. NATO
has always provided the United States
with something few other alliances can,
political legitimacy. When Washington
acts alongside NATO members, it doesn't
appear to be a unilateral move. It looks
like an international response with
diplomatic weight. That shapes how
actions are perceived and how they are
resisted. So, without Europe, America
would lose not only allies, but also
political cover.
Finally, there is the defense market.
Europe may rely on US capabilities, but
it is also the largest and most
consistent market for American weapons.
Over the past decade, roughly a third of
US arms exports went to Europe, but
since 2022, that share has grown even
further. Poland, Germany, the
Netherlands, and others have placed
large orders for systems like F-35 jets,
Patriot missiles, and HIMARS.
The F-35 program alone involves more
than a dozen European countries with
hundreds of aircraft either ordered or
planned, locking them into decades of
maintenance, upgrades, and integration
with US systems. Those acquisitions are
not just commercial deals. They sustain
a significant portion of the US defense
industrial base and reinforce long-term
dependency. Without Europe, American
defense giants [music] such as Lockheed
Martin, Raytheon, and Boeing would lose
their biggest export market overnight.
Yet, even taking all of that into
account and the mutual dependence
between them, it is Europe that stands
to lose the most from an American exit.
The most profound issue would be
political coordination. There are two
ways it could go down. Most likely,
NATO's decision-making could splinter
along national lines with members
beginning to hedge. Instead of relying
on a single overarching framework, they
could build multiple layers of regional
pacts.
Western Europe, led by France and
Germany, could push for a more
centralized approach and attempt to
restore the continent's
military-industrial base. But, that
concept wouldn't fully align with the
priorities of Eastern Europe. Poland and
the Baltic states operate under a
different timeline. For them, the threat
is urgent and so [music] they would
focus on quick results rather than
long-term integration projects. Either
way, as countries assume greater
responsibility for their own defense,
>> [music]
>> coordination would become more
difficult. Over time, European security
would shift away from a single unified
structure toward a mosaic of smaller
alliances.
Alternatively, suppose Europe adapts and
finds a way to overcome its internal
disagreements. [music]
Somehow, someway, unity is preserved and
in the decades following, Europe not
only restores its capabilities but
undergoes structural change in the
process. Defense spending, which had
long been debated and delayed, becomes a
baseline requirement. Industrial
production scales up, not in response to
a crisis, but as a permanent feature of
policy. The new NATO that emerges
rebuilds its command structure under
European control, but that shift in
power [music] carries profound
consequences.
For decades, Europe's passive military
posture was not just a weakness, it was
intentional. The United States carried
the burden of defense, but in doing so,
it also retained control over the course
of the alliance. By assuming all
security decisions, America discouraged
nearly every major world power in
history from restoring independent
military postures.
Dependence made it easier to keep allies
in line. A Europe that relied on
American protection had limited room to
do otherwise. And so, with the exception
of Russia, Europe's instinct to compete
gradually wore away. Its geopolitics
effectively froze. In and of itself,
that is the art of NATO.
However, that subjugated arrangement
would not survive an American exit. The
moment Europe is forced to defend
itself, it also gains the ability to act
on its own terms. That wouldn't be
noticeable right away, but within 40 to
50 years of America's exit, Europe could
very well emerge as a power center in
its own right. And once that happens,
the geopolitical clock would turn back
to a time when relations between Western
countries were conditional, negotiated,
and at times contested.
Altogether, stepping away from NATO
would certainly reduce America's
commitments, free up resources, and
[music] shift its focus elsewhere. In
the short term, that works, but down the
line, it would come at an irreparable
price. Skipping the bill often comes at
the cost of credibility.
Remember, if you want to try Freecash,
the link is in the description. You'll
get a $10 bonus after completing [music]
your first offer.
I've been your host Shirvan from
CaspianReport. If you enjoy these
videos, consider supporting the channel
on Patreon and click the bell icon so
the next one doesn't slip past you.
Thank you for your time and sal.